---
title: "Mauerläuferklettersteig and Alpspitze"
date: 2019-09-22T21:33:53+02:00
year: "2019"
publishdate: 2019-09-22T19:33:53+02:00
draft: false
resources:
- src: images/*.jpg
background: 9.jpg
categories:
- hiking
- via ferrata
---

The friends I usually head into the mountains with were not available this
weekend, but the weather is perfect: sunny, stable, and warm, but not too hot.
Thus, I decide to do a solo trip. Being solo has the advantage that I can
attempt a challenge that the other friends are not up to (yet): the
Mauläuferklettersteig, one of the hardest via ferratas in Germany with
a difficulty rating of D/E. While this is technically not a higher rating than
the Ottenalm-Direttissima had last weekend, the Mauerläuferklettersteig has much
longer difficult stretches with ratings of individual parts seldom dropping
below D. (The overall difficulty rating is determined by the highest rating of
an individual part, but not the length of segments or total number of difficult
segments.)

{{<loc "47.43184" "11.06142">}}

I take the train at 7:13am from Munich Central Station to
Garmisch-Partenkirchen. A short bus ride brings me to the Alpspitz gondola that
brings me up to the Osterfelderkopf. From there it is a quick 20 minute descent
to the start of the Mauerläuferklettersteig.

{{< rimg src="1.jpg" caption="The wall with the Mauerläuferklettersteig looks quite impressive on the approach.">}}

Down there I switch into my climbing shoes and start the ascent. It already
starts out hard with a D/E rated spot and a loose steel rope. A taste of what is
yet to come, but at least the steel rope will be less loose in the upper parts.
While the ferrata is demanding with steep sections and no artificial holds for
the feet, it does not give me too much trouble. Real rock climbing tought me how
to move efficiently, conserve my arm strength, and stay calm. Some guide books
describe the ferrata as psychologically demanding, but I was on climbing routes
(for example the {{<refPost "190716-squamish">}}slab climbing in
Squamish{{</refPost>}}) that demanded much more mental strength. The guide books
also say, that there are very few rest spots, but I can find plenty. Another
skill from climbing, and there you often climb even longer sections without
a rest. So, I make good progress and soon even overtake a couple.

{{< rimg src="2.jpg" caption="The view with the gondala station at the left.">}}

{{< rimg src="3.jpg" caption="Shortly before a rope ladder that informs me that most of the hardest parts are behind me, but some are still to come.">}}

{{< rimg src="5.jpg" alt="Rope ladder">}}

{{< rimg src="6.jpg" alt="Rope ladder">}}

{{< rimg src="7.jpg" caption="A big, sloped ledge. From here on it is easy and the finish is near.">}}

The final test (though there is an easy alternate way around) is a three-rope
bridge. That is technically correct, but none of the guide books told me that
all three ropes are vertically stacked. Usually the top two ropes are besides
each other, so that you have support for balance on either side. However, this
construction makes the three-rope bridge effectively a quite long two rope
bridge (which is less stable than a three-rope bridge). But there is no stopping
for me!

{{< rimg src="8.jpg" alt="Rope bridge">}}

{{< rimg src="9.jpg" caption="Looking back at the rope bridge">}}

A few more easy moves and I top out at the Bernadeinkopf (2144m). I take short
break to eat a bit, switch back to my mountain boots, enjoy the view, and figure
out where to continue. To make this a full day worth of activity, I want to
climb the Alpspitze (2628m) next. The Mauerläuferklettersteig was supposed to
take 2:30h, but I made it in just 1:15h. I have plenty of time for a second
mountain.

{{< rimg src="10.jpg" caption="The Alpspitze with the moon.">}}

I climb the Alpspitze via the Ostgrat (“eastern arête”) which is mostly an
alpine hiking trail with a short section being an easy via ferrata. Because it
is so easy (and I put my gear back into my backpack), I do not secure myself.
The Alpspitze turns out to be a bit overrun and I am moving in the opposite
direction than most people (most descent via the Ostgrat), so I have to wait
every now and then to let people pass.

{{< rimg src="12.jpg" caption="Soooo many people">}}

I make it to the summit still during lunch time. I have another break and enjoy
the view, especially of the Jubiläumsgrat (“jubilee arête”). It goes from the
Zugspitze (Germany's highest point) to the Hochblassen and from there you can
cross over to the Alpspitze. This might be very well be worth doing someday. But
it is quite challenging, involves some actual climbing and not all parts can be
easily secured or belayed on. I think, I need to acquire a few more skills (and
find the right partner) before attempting that.

{{< rimg src="17.jpg" caption="The Jubiläumsgrat with the Zugspitze at the end.">}}

{{< rimg src="14.jpg" alt="View from the Alpspitze">}}

{{< rimg src="15.jpg" caption="View of Garmisch-Partenkirchen">}}

{{< rimg src="16.jpg" caption="The Ostgrat that I ascended.">}}

The view is beatiful. Nevertheless, I eventually get satisfied with it and start
my descent. Again against the usual flow of people down the Alpspitz-Ferrata.
This is another, but easy (A/B), via ferrata. It is known for its many and long
ladder like parts. Because it is now past lunch time, most people already
summited and are descending via the Ostgrat by now. So I still have a few groups
coming up that I need to let pass in the beginning, but then it quickly dies
out. Despite this being the easier ferrata today, I get into a more dangerous
situation. Just as I am about to enter a notch there is suddenly a shower of
rocks coming down in exactly that place. Probably some person higher up caused
this rockfall. That is why it is important to wear a helmet during such
activities. Luckily I do not get hit and can then savely pass.

{{< rimg src="18.jpg" caption="The beginning of the descent.">}}

{{< rimg src="19.jpg" caption="The most famous ladder in the Alpspitz-Ferrata.">}}

There is an aspecially famous ladder of iron rungs in the Alpspitz-Ferrata that
is depicted in many photos and guide books. As a child I saw one of those which
made me totally want to climb that mountain. Probably my first outdoor related
goal? My parents did this with me when I was 12. It is nice to reminiscice in
these memories while going down the ladder.

{{< rimg src="alpspitze2000.jpg" caption="Climbing the Alpspitze at the age of 12.">}}

{{< rimg src="20.jpg" caption="The ladder from further back. A perspective rarely shown.">}}

{{< rimg src="21.jpg" caption="The view back to the Bernadeinkopf with the Mauerläuferklettersteig.">}}

{{< rimg src="22.jpg" caption="Almost back at the gondola.">}}

Back at the gondola station, I walk onto the Alpspix viewing plattform, but do
not stay there for long. The view from the Alpspitze was better and more
rewarding. Before taking the gondola down, I eat
[Kaiserschmarrn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaiserschmarrn) (“Emporer's
Mess”), a local dish consisting of a sort of shredded pancake with raisins and
apple sauce. I did not have it since I moved to Munich and decided that this
must be corrected. I am not too fond of the German/Bavarian cuisine (often too
heavy), but this is great dish.

In summary, a really great day with a demanding via ferrata and a nice mountain
summit with a great view!
