---
title: "Riffelspitze"
date: 2019-10-03T20:11:47+02:00
publishdate: 2019-10-04T20:11:47+02:00
draft: false
resources:
- src: images/*.jpg
background: 5.jpg
categories:
- hiking
---

Despite consistent rain on Wednesday afternoon and evening, Fabian, Martin,
Kristina and I decide to trust the weather forecast and plan a hike this
Thursday (a holiday in Germany). It turns out to be a good decision and we get
rewarded with some great nature scenes during this day.

We take an early train to Garmisch-Partenkirchen and then continue a few more
stops with the Zugspitzbahn, a cog railway that goes up all the way to the
Zugspitze, Germany's highest peak. But we exit after a few stops in Hammersbach.

{{<loc "47.4652" "11.0456">}}

From there we start our hike going through the Höllental (“hell's valley”)
inbetween two impressive high ridge lines. It is also a well known route towards
the top of the Zugspitze, but this is not our destination today.

{{< rimg src="1.jpg" caption="The Höllental">}}

About an hour passed, and we reach the Höllentaleingangshütte (“hell's valley
entrance cabin”) and the next 700 meters from there get quite impressive as we
go through the Höllentalklamm (“hell's valley gorge”). It is an extremly narrow
gorge, just as wide as the stream going through it, with steep rock on either
side. The path often goes through short tunnels and has been cut artificially
into the rock. It also turns out that we get quite wet because the rain from the
previous day is still flowing down everywhere (good thing we have Gore-Tex
hardshells).

{{< rimg src="2.jpg" caption="Entering the Höllentalklamm">}}

{{< rimg src="3.jpg" caption="It is really narrow">}}

After passing the Höllentalklamm, we enter a gorgeous scenery. We are now at an
elevation of about 1300m which was high enough for the rain of last night to
turn into snow. So we find ourselves among a mixture of green conifers and golden
autumn leaves covered in a thin layer of white snow with an impressive mountain
range in the background.

{{< rimg src="5.jpg" caption="This scenery, so worth it!">}}

In this scenery lies also the Höllentalangerhütte (roughly “hell's valley grass
field cabin” I believe, not quite sure about the meaning of “anger”).

{{< rimg src="6.jpg" caption="Some signage at the Höllentalangerhütte. These signs usually denote hiking trails, but on these signs it gives you directions related to the cabin, such as “patio & view” or “drinks & snack”.">}}

We make our way to the far end of the valley and start to ascent the
Riffelscharte (“ripple notch”).

{{< rimg src="7.jpg" caption="The view back on the Höllental. Can you spot the Höllentalangerhütte?">}}

We finally ascend high enough to make it out of the shadow of the surrounding
mountains into the warm(er) sun. We take advantage of that by having our lunch
break. We can spot a number of chamois around us. They are not really dangerous,
but be a little bit cautious if you are below them in case they happen to kick
down a rock.

{{< rimg src="8.jpg" caption="A chamois">}}

From the end of the Höllental the ascent was quite steep, but it gets even
steeper. Luckily, there are some steel ropes installed that you can hold on to.
Soon the snow cover starts to get thicker as we get higher.

{{< rimg src="9.jpg" alt="Snow cover">}}

Then we finally make it to the top of the Riffelscharte. Unfortunately, we got
engulfed in clouds and do not see much. Anyways, we continue to ascend the
nearby Riffelspitze (“ripple peak”) along an arête. Not soon after the cloud
cover breaks and we get a spectecular view of the Eibsee.

{{< rimg src="10.jpg" caption="The Eibsee">}}

{{< rimg src="11.jpg" caption="Going up the ridge line">}}

{{< rimg src="12.jpg" caption="Another view of the Eibsee">}}

The last bit before the summit gets quite steep and in addition many of the
rocks are covered in snow or wet from molten snow. Being extra cautios and with
some help of our hands we work our way upwards. Almost on top of the summit, the
snow patches change into ice and we decide that this gets too risky. It might
very well be possible to get all the way up, but going down is always harder.
Even going down the part we have already ascended takes us quite a while to get
down again.

{{< rimg src="k - 3.jpg" alt="Me">}}

{{< rimg src="13.jpg" caption="Attempting to summit">}}

{{< rimg src="14.jpg" caption="View back on the ridge line">}}

{{< rimg src="15.jpg" caption="We have to descent this again">}}

{{< rimg src="16.jpg" alt="Fabian and Kristina">}}

{{< rimg src="17.jpg" caption="The peak of the Riffelspitze">}}

On a little plateau, we have another break to eat our summit cake (that we could
not eat on the summit). From there, besides the view of the Eibsee, we can also
see two young women that we passed on the way down, making it up all the way
onto the summit.

{{< rimg src="18.jpg" alt="The Eibsee">}}

Then we descend down to the Eibsee. The first part is quite steep and is secured
with a steel rope. That allows us to descend quite quickly by going backwards
while holding the rope leaning back and stemming against the rock with your
feet. Below that we have to go through a lot of scree. It is fine enough that it
nicely dampens the steps and to sort of slide down on (a lot similar to sliding
down through steep snow on snow shoes). The final bit is a mostly easy walk
through grasslands and forrests, though we get slightly lost at one point. Put
once we noticed (because the trail was getting way to steep) that is quickly
corrected thanks to GPS.

{{< rimg src="k - 1.jpg" alt="Going down">}}

Down in Eibsee we have some time before the Zugspitzbahn will bring us back and
we take a look at the lake itself. Unfortunately, we are a bit unlucky with
getting back. They do not let us on the train because supposedly there are
already too many people on it (despite more people getting off at our station
than are being let on), so we have to wait for another 30 minutes which makes us
miss the next train from Garmisch-Partenkirchen. The next train thereafter was
cancelled and so we have to wait almost another hour for the third train back to
Munich.

{{< rimg src="19.jpg" caption="The Eibsee">}}

Despite the bad luck with the trains, it was a great hike with
really amazing and varied scenery at this time of year. We ascended about 1500m
up to a peak height of 2200m, and descended about 1300m  It took us about 7h
including breaks.
